# Wallabout Bay

The site revels in industrial innovation from its first encounter with the colonial settlers that would populate the city’s growing independent district outside of lower Manhattan. The historical richness as first a natural bay, Dutch farmland, Revolutionary wartime prison barge, successful long-time active Navy Yard, 1970s 80s urban blight, and today’s city industrial park reaches world wide scale in its (deeds). Joris Jansen de Rapalje, Brooklyn’s first Walloon to inhabit the site, manages to till the land until British control in 1781 and whose farmland counts as one of the many plots which defined rural Brooklyn at that time. This character makes a reappearance in most of the early Dutch colony’s crucial negotiations to gain independence from the ruling (who in Holland controls the colonies), including the settlers’s standoff with Dutch mayor Stuyvesant, whose farmland used to be just across the water in Manhattan where currently stands the Stuyvesant Town housing project. The natural habitat at the site, including a stream that is now forgotten under Wallabout Street, is cruelly taken under seige by British commanders during the Revolutionary War and is transformed into a prison barge. Thousands of captive people have died in the ships during the Revolution under horrific conditions and notoriously more people died in the Bay than in the all of the war’s battlefields. The Navy Yard continues its identity as a wartime (unit) well into the 20th century, operating from 1801 to 1966 at the most crucial times in world history. Its dry dock allowed for the construction and repair of ships, which would allow ship to come into the bay and have river water drained out so that the sufficient repairs can be made. Contemporary shipbuilding sites at the time Brooklyn Navy Yard was active include the Bushwick Inlet which ceased production by 1889. Similar dry docks were founded on the west side of the East River on the Manhattan shoreline, mostly concentrated in today’s Lower East Side and more specifically at the edge of where Tompkins Square Park is today. The site was decommissioned as an active Navy Yard in 1966 along with many other military bases by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara which caused many workers to be displaced and the site rapidly declined in industrial activity. The Brooklyn Navy Yard Development Corporation controls the site from the 1980s on and diversifies the traditional maritime industry to include other occupations such as roof top greenhouse agriculture and the nation’s largest film making studio outside of Hollywood. 
